---
layout: post
title: Final Project Reflection
---

My write of the [project](https://github.com/asmit-a/pic-16b-project) done by the Aca-coders - Eva and Asmita.

## Overall Achievement

In our project we worked with census data and created a webapp with two main functions. The first is visualizations. *Request a State-wide Visualization* allows the user to select from different five different table what kind of visualization they want to use and select a state to see that visualization for. *Request a Country-wide Visualization* allows the user to select from five variables and see a countrywide map of that variable's value in each state.

The second functionality, under *Request a Table to Download*, allows the user to search for a table by topic and year, see a list of results to select from, and then see the structure of their selected table and be able to download it. There is also an additional feature since the project presentation where the user can see their selected table in other years and download the data for each group of years with the same format.


## What I'm especially proud of

### Automating table selection process
When I was first working with the `censusdata` package, I started manipulating the output of the search feature to allow it to be easier to look for tables. The output was a tuple where the name of the table was repeated for each variable. I would instead get an alphabetized list of all the unique table names, so it was easier to find what table I wanted. To make it easier to work with, a also wrote code to look up the codes for a table by the table name from the list.

I did something similar when we were looking at downloading tables. When we used the `censusdata.download` function, the tables would have census geo codes for row labels and variable codes for column names. I figured out how to change the row labels to a variable for state and created the `get_tables` function to automate the entire process of reformatting the table into something that was easily usable and could contain data from different years.

After our second project update when we were considering what to add for the final project, I realized I already had most of the pieces to allow a user to search for and download a table of their choosing. I just had make the code I used to search and match tables into a functions (`see_tables` and `get_codes`), combine them with the `get_tables` function, and turn them into forms on the webapp ending in a CSV download.

This was the part of the project I was most excited to figure out how to implement and have on the webapp.

### Display for structure of the table
There is a function, `censusdata.printtable`, that was really helpful for seeing how the table was organized. But even then, longer variables names got cut off. I realized all the variable names had the same structure with subvariables being the same as their parent with an additional double exclamation point and category. So I could indent by the number of levels (number of double exclamation points) and only print the last part. 

This worked in Jupyter Notebook, but HTML ignored the indents. I realized that creating an unordered list would work best for doing this. So I added lists to my function, which was complicated with the stacking, as I would sometimes have to leave a list item open and create another unordered list within it. But it was very satisfying when I got it to display on the page, as I think it is a useful feature to understand the variables.

### *Your table in other years* page

When I was considering potential additional features to add to the table, I wanted to go beyond implementing functions from the `censusdata` package to make something particularly useful. One of the challenges we faced in choosing tables for the visualizations was that not all tables were available in all years and even if they were, they often had a different structure. Through this page, the user can see if their selected table is available in other years without having to search year by year. They can also see how the structure changes in different years and download tables from multiple years with the same structure in one file. 

## Ideas for going further

### Having more dynamic table visualizations

It would be cool if the user could see another view of the data per their specifications and be able to compare different demographics and regions.

### Adding more user input to the download table feature
There are other inputs to the `censusdata.search` and `cesusdata.download` functions that could be add to the *Request a Table to Download* feature of the webapp.

The webapp currently only considers and searches for American Community Survey 5-year estimates. However there are other surveys the census does that we could include in the search. They do have different years, so there would need to be an additional step in the process to first ask for the type of census data desired. It is also important to note that there is a reason we chose to work with ACS5 data, as there are fewer years of other types of data available via the `censusdata` package.

An important input to the `censusdata.download `function is the geography argument of how the data is broken down. Currently our webapp only uses a table with data broken down by state, but the `censusdata` package allows data to be broken down within a state by county. This would be more complex to implement, as there are more options to choose from and it would require modifications to the get_tables function to format the locations.

Another modification would be to allow the user to select the variables they wanted from the table they select.

These additions would make the webapp include more of the functionality of the `censusdata` package, just in a graphical user interface. 

## How it compares to our proposal

In our proposal, we planned to use census data to see how family structures have evolved over the past decades. We wanted to create a webapp with customizable visualizations as well as predictions. 

In doing our project, we ended up being limited by the API package we used so could only gather data from the past 15 years. Partly due to this limitation and the complexities involved, we weren't able model family strucutres and make predictions. We did, however, add another feature to our site, which allows the user to easily search for and download tables.

## What I learned

### Working with census data using an API - the censusdata package
When we started out on this project, we learned that the best way to access census data would be through an API, and there were some packages in python that could help with this. There was a lot to learn, as we were unfamiliar with the way census data works and the different types tables that are available. After struggling with the `census` package, which required a key and additional research to download tables, we found [this write-up](https://towardsdatascience.com/accessing-census-data-with-python-3e2f2b56e20d) on the `censusdata` package. By reading it we learned how to search for a table, view it's structure, and download the variables we wanted to use.

### Directing to other pages and using sessions
In previous webapps, I used `render_template` to add information to a form after submitting. But in the *Request a Table to Download* feature, I needed to navigate to a different page with a new form. I realized I should use `redirect` and `url_for` instead, but this made it more challenging to add arguments that would control what was displayed. After doing some research I learned how to store variable using `sessions`, where I could use arguments in the `render_template` for the new page without having to pass them from the previous page. This was very useful for the project, as I had to use many of the same variables (such as user inputs for tables) again.

### Creating an app route with an input
When I was adding the final feature to the webapp, I suddenly had to deal with an unknown number of CSV files the user needed to be able to download. The way to allow this that made sense was to have file_name as an argument to the getCSV function. So I had to learn how to add an argument to an app route function and call that function using `url_for` with the argument in the HTML file.

## How I will use this experience in the future
The most interesting part of this project for me was automating the process of searching for and downloading tables. Based on that and my other intests in coding classes, I would like to get into automation. 

After college I plan to work as an actuary in an insurance company, which is currently transitioning to Python from SAS and SQL. This means there will likely be many processes that will need to be updated or created using Python that I could work on.

